Source  : a16z
Title   : Meet the a16z Talent Engineer Fellows
Date    : 2026-08-19 18:01 UTC
Link    : https://www.a16z.news/p/meet-the-a16z-talent-engineer-fellows
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

America
|
Tech
|
Opinion
|
Culture
|
Charts
We are excited to announce the fellows who will be part of the inaugural a16z Talent Engineer Fellowship, an 8-week cohort of talent leaders for the people building the next operating system for recruiting.
We received thousands of applications from talented people around the world. Today, we’re thrilled to share more about the inaugural cohort of 50 fellows who are leading talent at companies like Jack & Jill, Ashby, OpenAI, AirBnB, Clay, Decagon, and Ramp.
Many are talent engineers who are building 0-to-1 AI-native talent systems and now lead- or are the powerhouses behind those functions at high growth AI companies. Folks like
Jared Long
,
Scott Bianco
and
Samantha Moberly
from Cursor,
Dan McCarthy
at Zapier,
Cynthia Chen
at Decagon,
Danielle Poreh
and
Ryan Ellis
at Clay,
Umesh Khanna
and
Ishan Deshpande
at SpaceXAI,
Johnny Sanchez
at Airbnb,
Saya Iwasaki
at Notion,
Jaime Jose
at Ramp,
Tommy Kilmer
and
Brian Hickey
at OpenAI
, and more.
Some are technical leaders redefining talent, building agentic headhunters, career development platforms, and talent-matching systems at scale like
Jeffrey Li
from Paraform,
Shahriar Tajbakhsh
at Metaview and Fillmore,
Matthew Wilson
at Jack & Jill,
Sahil Seth
at Talent Pluto,
Edmund Cuthbert
at Superposition,
Seb Cuadros
and
Ali Alobadi
at Fonzi, and more.
Others are founders taking people graphs to the next level, scaling the infrastructure behind how people and networks connect like
Pieter Ouwerkerk
at Happenstance, and
Jan van der Vegt
at Exa.
Congratulations and welcome, a16z Talent Engineer Fellows!
Sign up here to stay in the loop about future fellowships and a16z opportunities.
Sign-up
Subscribe now
This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should not be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, this content is not investment advice, nor is it intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. This newsletter may link to other websites or contain other information obtained from third-party sources - a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. If this content includes third-party advertisements, a16z has not reviewed such advertisements and does not endorse any advertising content or related companies contained therein. Any investments or portfolio companies mentioned, referred to, or described are not representative of all investments in vehicles managed by a16z; visit
https://a16z.com/investment-list/
for a full list of investments. Other important information can be found at
a16z.com/disclosures
. You’re receiving this newsletter since you opted in earlier; if you would like to opt out of future newsletters you may unsubscribe immediately.