Source  : a16z
Title   : Meet the a16z Forward Deployed Engineer Fellows
Date    : 2026-07-22 17:11 UTC
Link    : https://www.a16z.news/p/meet-the-a16z-forward-deployed-engineer
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

America
|
Tech
|
Opinion
|
Culture
|
Charts
We are excited to announce the fellows who will be part of the inaugural a16z Forward Deployed Engineer Fellowship, an 8-week cohort of FDEs and Applied AI leaders at the forefront of deploying AI into real-world enterprises.
We received thousands of applications from talented people around the world. Today, we’re thrilled to share more about the inaugural cohort of 65 fellows who are leading FDE at companies like OpenAI, Mistral, Cognition, HappyRobot, Poetic, and Decagon.
Many are Palantir alumni who are now founding members of companies pioneering the FDE playbook like
Barry McCardel
from Hex,
Kevin Bai
at Anthropic,
Isa Gomez
from OpenAI,
Senta Knuth
from ElevenLabs, and
Vinoo Ganesh
from Kepler.
Some are FDE architects behind top high-growth startups like
Luv Kothari
from Snowflake,
Perry Ha
from Decagon,
Bo Sun
at Notion,
Leo Mehr
at Ramp,
Niko Grupen
at Harvey, and
Anitej Biradir
from ElevenLabs.
Others are the next generation of FDE builders already deploying live like
Priya Khandelwal
from Nixo,
Tom Kimbrell
from Stuut,
Lucas Kiefer
from Strala,
Kian Fattahy
from Saronic,
Chelsey Fang
from Pylon,
Amy Jin
from Decagon,
Rohan Ramani
from Netic,
Jakub Hojsan
from Exa, and
Mariano Pennini
from Spade.
Congratulations and welcome, a16z Forward Deployed Engineer Fellows!
Sign up here to stay in the loop about future fellowships and a16z opportunities.
Sign-up
Subscribe now
This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should not be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, this content is not investment advice, nor is it intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. This newsletter may link to other websites or contain other information obtained from third-party sources - a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. If this content includes third-party advertisements, a16z has not reviewed such advertisements and does not endorse any advertising content or related companies contained therein. Any investments or portfolio companies mentioned, referred to, or described are not representative of all investments in vehicles managed by a16z; visit
https://a16z.com/investment-list/
for a full list of investments. Other important information can be found at
a16z.com/disclosures
. You’re receiving this newsletter since you opted in earlier; if you would like to opt out of future newsletters you may unsubscribe immediately.