Source  : a16z
Title   : Meet the second cohort of a16z New Media Fellows
Date    : 2026-06-19 13:55 UTC
Link    : https://www.a16z.news/p/meet-the-second-cohort-of-a16z-new
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

America
|
Tech
|
Opinion
|
Culture
|
Charts
The a16z New Media Fellowship is back for round two! We’re excited to introduce a brand-new cohort of 65 generational storytellers, podcasters, X-poasters, and substackers at the frontier of new media.
The fellowship kicks off next week and will run through the summer. Here’s a glimpse into the group:
Noah Smith
, Economist and writer, Noahpinion
Chris Painter
, President of METR
Aly Pavela
, Head of Community Communications at Stripe
Rohan Kumar
, Head of Vertical Platforms at MrBeast
Hannah Broadhurst
, Head of Entertainment & Content Marketing at Amazon
Danielle Meister Lurie
, Head of Global Comms, Social Media, & Film at Zipline
Thijs Simonian
, Co-Director of Stanford TreeHacks
Ian Curtis
, Technical Staff Member at World Labs
Madison Kanna
, Software Engineer at Baseten
Grace Werner
, VP of Growth at the Foundation for American Innovation
Katherine Dee
, Writer of default.blog
Austin Schumacher
, prev VP of Marketing at UTA, VP of Brand at Coinbase, Head of Brand Marketing at Lyft
Anu Atluru
, Writer of Working Theorys
Adel Wu
, Growth at Reducto, prev SWE at Meta
Christian Catalini
, Founder of the MIT Cryptoeconomics Lab
We hope you’ll join us in celebrating this group for everything they’ve accomplished so far - and in following their journey ahead!
If you’re interested, you can also
sign up here
to stay in the loop about future fellowships and new media opportunities.
Subscribe now
This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should not be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, this content is not investment advice, nor is it intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. This newsletter may link to other websites or contain other information obtained from third-party sources - a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. If this content includes third-party advertisements, a16z has not reviewed such advertisements and does not endorse any advertising content or related companies contained therein. Any investments or portfolio companies mentioned, referred to, or described are not representative of all investments in vehicles managed by a16z; visit
https://a16z.com/investment-list/
for a full list of investments. Other important information can be found at
a16z.com/disclosures
. You’re receiving this newsletter since you opted in earlier; if you would like to opt out of future newsletters you may unsubscribe immediately.